And they say that the most difficult problem on
Kennedy's desk was, where shall the next
cyclotron go?
Well, you know what happened in November of 63 in
Dallas? And Mr. Johnson became president as a
consequence of that.
I recall at that time reading an article in the
journal Science. I've forgotten the author. I
want to say David. It
escapes me. It was entitled, When Pure Science
Meets Pure Politics. And it was telling the story
of The machinations going on about where shall the
next cyclotron go?
Well, Earl Rudder's association with Lyndon
Johnson was clearly far and away the thing that
turned that tide and got the cyclotron allocated
to Texas A&M University. Okay, but your question
had to do with women and minorities. Let's stay
with that just a second. Can you think of any other
Rudder-Johnson relationships that brought some
special blessing to A&M?
Not quickly offhand, no, Haskell. But that
cyclotron was a big one.
Let's see, then while we're on new programs, how
did chemistry and economics come to be
highlighted for
great strengthening?
And I think chemistry came to be selected as a
spotlight
center because of the Welch Foundation and W.T.
Doherty's interest in chemistry.
Economics became selected as a program to be taken
to national
visibility. I think mainly because of its already
established recognition across the country as a
good solid source of masters people who are quite
capable at the doctoral level. Al Chalk, head of
the department,
insisted upon all things on good teaching,
outstanding teaching, and selective
recruitment of top students for the economics
department. And the young people that graduated
with a degree in economics who wanted to go on and do
graduate work were sought after, in fact, by the
graduate schools across the country. At that
time, we did not have a doctorate in economics
ourselves, and that didn't come until after Mel
Greenhut got here. Now, was that after liberal
arts was split away from education, or was that
under your days?
Did you hire Greenhut or was that later? Yeah, I
hired Greenhut. I say I hired. Al Chalk selected
him, brought him in. We employed him, yes. And
Greenhut immediately,
on the good solid base in economics that he found,
immediately designated that this department's
strength at the doctoral level shall be built
toward econometrics, quantitative economics.
He said that's clearly the way the discipline is
going and that he intended to recruit top people
who were of that
ilk. Green Hut came from Florida, as I recall.
Florida State. Florida State. Florida State,
okay.
Let's see.
Do you remember any pioneer women, outstanding
female students that were precedent makers or
setters? No, I don't, Haskell. Or any black
student leaders before Fred McClure. I don't
know. No, he was the top one then and in my mind is
still now. I agree. Go back and trace, if you can,
when Arts and Sciences was broken up and weren't
there a number of steps going from Arts and
Sciences to the five different colleges there?
that exists now.
By a number of steps you mean the procedural
mechanism by which colleges are separated and
established? No, it didn't go from arts and
sciences all at once, did it, to education,
business? Oh no, oh no. Well, that's what I... The
first change in organization was a separation of
science and the others. And the others came to be
called the liberal arts.
And that took place
late spring of 1965.
Let's see.
Oh, yes.
In 1965, the spring enrollment data, spring
semester enrollment for 1965.
Oh, I see
what I've done. showed that the College of Arts and
Sciences had become for the first time the largest
college at the university, not only in terms of
semester credit hours produced and size of
faculty, but in numbers of students registered
for degree purposes in that college. Larger than
engineering? My God. Larger than agriculture? It
can't be. And of course, vet medicine was a small
enrollment. Boy, I think that was a catalyst which
quickly brought the division of science from the
liberal arts. Plus one other feature.
By that time, I had an associate dean in science. He
had come from Rice University, was a
distinguished scientist in the field of
cryogenics, low temperature physics, whose name
was Charles Squire. Charles was a leading
researcher supported by Welch funds. And this
again, I think, was the influence of W.T.
You need a scientist up there to help dean the
sciences. So
I was advised one day that I needed an associate
dean in science, and that
come go with me. This is President Rutter. Let's go
down to Rice and visit a guy in his laboratory and
see what you think of him." President Rudder and I
took a trip to Rice, did spend a couple of hours in
Charles Squire's laboratory,
got acquainted with him, very interesting.
He came back, Frank, what would you think about
having him as an associate dean for science? Fine,
okay, good.
No need to get rattled over such an item.
At the same time, there had been selected a new vice
president for research at about this time, One,
Dr. Andrew Suttles. And he had come from a
commercial laboratory, I want to say one of the
petrochemical people's laboratories, I've
forgotten which, Exxon or Texaco or somebody like
that. Who identified him, do you know? I'm sure it
was W.T. Daugherty, without any question.
and Earl, you need a vice president for research.
Maybe not in that language, but
he was selected for that position.
Well, the coming of, I think they had been selected
by this time, but by, It was clear that science
wanted to bask in its own sunlight and didn't want
to be burdened
with association with the liberal arts. Think how
much faster we can grow and what greater things we
can do in science if we have our own identity, etc.
When the enrollment figures in the spring of 65
came in, that was a clincher.
Let's divide science out of liberal arts, out of
arts and sciences, and that way they will no longer
be the largest college on campus. That's my
conjecture, Haskell. No one ever told me that, but
it was relatively Maybe it was just coincidence,
happened at the same time, but I thought it had some
effect.
let's see your question then after science uh...
was created after science and liberal arts were
divided then geosciences quickly followed the
following year and the creation of a college of
geoscience and that made sense mainly because of
oceanography and meteorology which were in
science
Had the largest sum of research going on in the
university anywhere, I think at one time, and I'm
not sure just when the date was, but at one time, the
research volume in dollars going on in the
Department of Oceanography and Meteorology, the
aggregate was larger than all other research done
on the campus. And that brought also geology, what
we now call geology and geophysics. Geology and
geophysics out of engineering. And geography out
of liberal arts. And
oceanography and meteorology well out of
science.
Now then, at that time, science
was so much on the move
And
resources were being allocated to science that
even A&M wasn't accustomed to.
President Rutter wanted members of the National
Academy of Science to give our program better
visibility. We didn't have any at the time.
with the opportunity to employ a college, a dean of
science, and a dean of geosciences the following
year, he dedicated himself to a recruitment
program that would be beamed at members of the
academy. And that's when Zener came aboard and
Bowers from Chicago and from Pittsburgh.
Both top flight guys.
At this time then, what was left with the College of
Liberal Arts, business and education, were they
still called departments? No, education was a
department, but business was and had always been a
division.
Business administration was next to be separated
out as a college. And I forget the year. It was after
65 and after, I want to say after 66, probably
either 67 or eight. And next, education was
separated out.
I had an offer from the University of Texas in the
fall of 1968 to
return over there as a fully tenured, full
professor and head of department of the
department from which i'd gotten my degree
and uh norman hackerman then president of ut
called earl rutter and said earl we want to see if we
can get frank hubert over here to do this job for us
earl called me over and said frank i know they're
talking with you I just want to ask you one thing,
and that is, if you will, before you make a final
decision on this, come sit down and talk with me.
I went over. The job was offered to me firm, with
tenure, the professorship, et cetera, and a
salary that exceeded my dean's salary at A&M.
I went back and talked to Mary Julia, and we were
uncertain as to what we wanted to do, really
uncertain. I was torn between the two. Austin is so
attractive, as is the University of Texas.
got an appointment with President Rutter, went in
and sat down with him and told him the details.
And he said, well, Frank, if you want to return to
education, isn't it time that we created a college
of education here?
We'll create a college of education here and you
can dean it if you want to.
I said, well, that's an inviting idea. He says,
well, I'll tell you what you do. Bring me a short
summary of what we need to do, the changes we need to
make, and what it'll cost us to get a college of
education going started.
Well, that evening, I went home. sat down at my
desk, wrote out a two-page summary of the
organizational nature and the additional
personnel required and what it would cost, and the
identity of the departments.
Took it back in the next day. He said, I'm going to
call the members of the Executive Committee of the
Regents. and place this before them and see if we
can't get quick action on it. He did, and within
another day, he called me in and said, Frank, the
deanship of the new College of Education is yours
if you want it.
And he says, we'll equal the salary that they
offered you at UT.
I took that home to Mary Julian. We agreed to accept
it and did. I
don't know how it happened, but that was very early
in 69.
President Rudder said, write the coordinating
board proposal for the new college, as I had done
for liberal arts and participated in the others.
He said, we'll get it moving. I had it on his desk by
the end of the week, the proposal for the new
college and its organization and so forth.
Ordinarily, a proposal for a new college would
usually take anywhere from 12
months to 18, minimum. for it to go through all of
the spots on the obstacle course. But this one, it
just seemed to set records. It hit the calendar
exactly right all along the way. And by that
following September, nine months later, we were
authorized as a college with degrees, et cetera,
et cetera, et cetera. Including the doctoral?
Pardon? Including the doctoral degrees? No. Oh,
not yet. We had to submit them separately to
Haskell. And we did so later on.
Then business... Business had already gone.
Education was the last to go. Right. How was John
Pearson selected as the Dean of Business?
I did a search, got recommendations from a number
of places. Let me see.
I have forgotten where John Pearson's name came
from. I think he was at North Texas. He was at North
Texas. I'm aware of that. But I don't recall how his
name got into focus. I didn't know him or know of
him, but it was recommended to my office.
From whom? By whom? Oh, my. Nonetheless, he turned
out to be the guy and was finally selected as dean of
that new college.
I also had invited to participate in that
selection a champ whom I had met in Wilmington,
Delaware, while on a two-day visit to the EI
DuPont, the Nemours Company. with a group of other
people from the soft sciences
who was then associate
dean of business at Notre Dame, a sparkling
fellow. But he turned the opportunity down. He
said, I've got too much ahead of me here. Pearson
was ultimately selected to become dean, and I
don't recall where his name came from. Fooey.
Okay. Right. As you then created the college, how
did you identify the key people to take over the
various units in the College of Education and your
staff? Well, in the College of Education, it was
relatively easy. The year before the College of
Education was authorized, we had a vacancy in the
headship of the Department of Education. This is
fall of 68. Paul Henseling had a voice problem.
Difficulty in talking and being understood.
He asked to be
I returned to a professorship.
It was late in the summer of 68. I
did not want to conduct a search for a new
department head at that late date, so I took it upon
myself to occupy the two positions. during that
year, 68, 69, dean of liberal arts and head of the
Department of Education.
I hope your transcriber will be aware
that these costs are necessary, and I apologize to
her or him for it. Now, as
head of the Department of Education, I got a
firsthand acquaintance with the people in
education in their various fields and made the
selections for their appointments on that basis.
I've heard also that the interim department head
sometimes wrote recommendations that the dean
turned down during that period. Yes. Really. I
felt it obligatory as head of the department to
make requests which I thought were justified, and
I did. And when I reviewed them from the dean's
office, I looked at them in terms of the overall
breadth and scope of the college at that time, and I
said, Yes, they need it, but we don't have the funds
for it, and so forth. Now,
so we got off. Well, we had some good people to start
with.
Glenn Johnson, doctorate from Teachers College,
Columbia.
Who was first head of Ed administration? Les
Richardson? I don't know. Finally got Hal
Hawkins, doctorate from Harvard. Ed Psychology,
Art Roach, doctorate from Notre Dame.
Jim Boone from here at A&M, and his doctorate was
here at A&M, I believe.
But we had some good people to start out with, and
they were hard workers. As this is being finished,
we now know that Mr. Rutter's health was
declining. When did you become aware, you think,
as you look back, that Mr. Rutter's health was
being impaired?
I don't recall specifically Haskell, a specific
moment in time. But do you remember sometimes
being with him, realizing that his energy wasn't
what it had been? I think so, and it showed up at the
executive committee meetings more than any place
else. He just didn't have the go and punch that he
had. And...
But he was keeping pace with the fast-moving
events on campus, sometimes not only keeping up
with them, but out there in front pulling them
along. He was also traveling. You can't imagine
the travels that he took. I think he responded to
every request made of him to make a speech
anywhere. Whatever the subject so long as it
related to Texas A&M University. Who were his key
contacts in Austin and Washington? The
individuals that he knew best that really helped
A&M a lot.
Tiger Teague in Washington, plus later LBJ
himself.
Let's see. John Connolly? Yes, John Connolly.
Bill Moore, of course, although he was not in
Austin, he was of Austin in a way.
Who was Speaker of the House at that time?
I don't know. I don't recall either, but I think
that was a good relationship for A&M. And was
Heatley one of Mr. Rutter's close contacts? I
don't recall. As chairman of whatever it was, Ways
and Means or Appropriations? I don't think he was a
great friend, as I recall. And Senator Aiken? I
don't know. I just don't know about Aiken. During
the Rutter years, who was the key A&M person to work
with the coordinating board?
His vice president, I think. Right, the chief,
what we now call the provost, vice president of
academic affairs. Yes. When you first, do you
recall any event, any circumstance under which
you heard Mr. Rutter had been hospitalized? How
did you all hear about it? How did you all know that
he was seriously ill?
I don't recall when or how that message came. It's
not clear in my memory when it came. I remember
hearing that after he was hospitalized, shortly
after he was hospitalized, he was rushed to
surgery. And he had to be taken in a subterranean
channel from one building to another. And it was
quite
a group there moving along with him. This was in
Houston. This is in Houston, yes. Let's see. His
surgeon was, who's the guy? It wasn't DeBakey. It
was,
do you recall? The other top guy. There are two down
there. The name is easy to recall. Denton Cooley. I
think he did the surgery.
It was just a shock when we heard of his death. An
absolute shock. Do you remember the memorial
service? Yes, very moving. I remember his
being laid in state in the rotunda of the
administration building.
Ludeke was named interim.
the board began its search for a new president of
the system and the university. Called in, I think,
each of the deans. I know I was called to express my
views about those that they were examining.
Really? Oh, good. Didn't know that. How
appropriate were their questions? Very good
questions. Excellent questions. Among the board
members, who seemed to be the key movers and
shakers at that point?
Haskell, hard to recall, I remember that Ford
Allbritton was active in the search for the new
president.
I also had heard prior to my going for the interview
that Jack Williams was being considered.
And my comment to the board was, you need look no
further. If you can get this man to come back to
Texas, you will have indeed pulled off a great coup
for this university. Do you know who it was that
originally suggested his name to them? No. You?
Earl Rudder told Fort Albritton and John Lindsay a
year and a half earlier in response to their
question, Earl, God help us if it were to happen,
but what should we do if anything ever happened to
you? Do you have somebody on site? And Mr.
Albritton said that Mr. Rutter said, no, I don't,
and it's my fault. I ought to, but I don't. Well,
what do we do if? Well, if you do... And he said that
this was an hour or two later that he said, I've been
thinking about it since then. And you go up there
because his coordinating board experience, his
knowledge of Texas, and his experience at Clemson
and with the Southern Association has been so
extensive. And Ford said, well, if that's what
Earl thought, the board was very... Do you... Each
of the deans were called in. Do you remember
anybody else that they... I don't know that... I
didn't hear from other deans that they were called
in. I'm assuming that they were, Haskell. But I
don't know of anyone else who might have been
endorsed by... A dean or other deans. As far as you
know, did Dr. Williams come to the campus for a
pre-selection interview visit? That I do not
know. I don't think he did. I don't know. How did you
learn that he had been selected? I think by the
media.
And what was the first impression that you and
others had of Dr. Williams as president? Great
excitement.
Just extremely happy that he would be willing to
come to A&M and take the leadership role here that
he did. Give some examples of some of his early
decisions, early successes.
Haskell, it's hard to say. He was so active on so
many fronts. I know that during the interim period
with Ludeke there, Lude began
involving students more in some of the basic
exercises and decisions than had ever been done
before. When President Williams came, he picked
that up and took it on to higher levels.
President Williams also
sought
advice from faculty groups and individuals
at an unprecedented pace, I think.
Can you think of any skills that a university CEO
needed that Jack Williams didn't have?
He was a good speaker. good experience,
energetic, student, faculty, sensitive, and so
forth? He had it all, Haskell.
Click that off just a minute. Okay. One of Dr.
Williams' key appointments was John Calhoun as
vice president. Yes. Describe him as the chief
academic officer and his relationship with you
and your dean colleagues. Yeah. I didn't know John
very well prior to his appointment as the academic
vice president. After he was appointed, there
was no special relationship between the two of us.
I responded in
the usual way to all of the normal request for the
flow of information up to that office.
I remember one occasion when Dr.
Calhoun, I
think, how to say this, challenged a decision i had
made in a way it was a student matter and a young lady
in
the college of liberal arts had come to me asking if
she could take 21 hours of work in a single semester
i looked at her record and i said no
she asked if there was someone else she could see
about this and i said yes if you want to question my
decision you can go see the vice president for
academic matters she did john called me over and i
think john was tempted to support the young lady i
said john i just can't go with it and he sustained me
but i have the feeling that If it had been himself
alone, he would have ruled otherwise. That may
have been an error on my part. That's the only time I
remember a
question about a decision I had made. Other than
that, I think our relationships were quite
friendly all along the way, Haskell. The
enrollment was zooming upward because Dr.
Williams had made it a condition of his acceptance
of the offer that an existing dormitory be
identified for women in January of 1971. He begins
in the fall of 70. And there had been no housing on
campus for women. How did that zoom in enrollment,
how did that affect you and your colleagues? Well,
in the College of Education, of course, it was a
great boon.
The women's opportunity for positions other than
in teaching had not yet developed to the point
where they were a strong magnet. for women to go to
engineering, to go to business especially, and to
other colleges. If you were a woman, you
trained to be a teacher.
And as a consequence, the College of Education
experienced a big, big increase in enrollment
very rapidly, quickly.
Do you remember any incidents that the increase in
women caused? I don't remember any problems. The
only problem was space. Right, for classes and
faculty and staff, but I don't remember any
student resentment or antagonism. No, no. Let's
see. Dr. Williams then was the president of the
system and of the institution as Mr. Rutter had
been. Yes. What were the benefits or the handicaps
of that arrangement? Well, the handicaps were one
of
time, I think. I...
The demands upon the president of the university
are so extensive.
And the demands upon the
president, or now chancellor of the system, are
again extensive. That to me, it's difficult to see
how one person can live through the two jobs
concurrently. I think that's one thing that got
Earl Rutter. It may have contributed some to Jack
Williams.
But
as you may know, a legislative committee in 1948
visited A&M as a result of a student uprising.
And
they had marched on the president's home.
In effect, they wanted more attention for student
matters. Well,
Haskell legislature appointed a committee to
come investigate it.
Incidentally on that committee was a
brother-in-law of mine at that time a senator from
Dallas
Fred Harris, oh, yes, okay a Baylor graduate now a
Part of that committee's report said clearly you
should separate the two positions name a
chancellor and a president and
And proceed accordingly. I don't know when that
was abandoned. When Dr. Harrington retired? Yes.
And I think he retired a little earlier than he
wanted to. Oh, yes, yes. And Mr. Rutter acquired
both? Both positions, yeah. Okay. Because I have
heard a myth, you might have been in the room, I've
heard a myth that at some key committee meeting, I
don't know whether it was Dean's or not, Mr. Rutter
came back from some session somewhere and came
into the room and closed the door and said, I won.
That he and Harrington had been going toe-to-toe.
It had been a test of strength, and he supposedly
had won. Hadn't heard about that. Then I heard Dr.
Harrington say, say, post-retirement a couple of
times, I heard him say, well, I got fired twice. I
got fired as president and as chancellor.